---
title: "Unit test on Epic middleware RxJS"
date: "2020-07-08"
---

Recently, I have to write test case for epic middleware(redux-observable, rxjs). Today, I am going to briefly describle the flow for unit test on redux-observable.

## RxJS unit test with Marble Diagrams

Let's start with the basic testing flow on rxjs. We can test our asynchronous RxJS code synchronously and deterministically by virtualizing time using the TestScheduler. ASCII marble diagrams provide a visual way for us to represent the behavior of an Observable. We can use them to assert that a particular Observable behaves as expected, as well as to create hot and cold Observables we can use as mocks.

<pre class=" language-javascript">
<code class=" language-javascript">
import { TestScheduler } from 'rxjs/testing';
 
const testScheduler = new TestScheduler((actual, expected) => {
  // asserting the two objects are equal
  // e.g. using chai.
  expect(actual).deep.equal(expected);
});
 
// This test will actually run *synchronously*
it('generate the stream correctly', () => {
  testScheduler.run(helpers => {
    const { cold, expectObservable, expectSubscriptions } = helpers;
    const e1 =  cold('-a--b--c---|');
    const subs =     '^----------!';
    const expected = '-a-----c---|';
 
    expectObservable(e1.pipe(throttleTime(3, testScheduler))).toBe(expected);
    expectSubscriptions(e1.subscriptions).toBe(subs);
  });
});
</code>
</pre>

Here's are some common marble syntax

- <code class=" language-javascript">' '</code> whitespace: horizontal whitespace is ignored, and can be used to help vertically align multiple marble diagrams.
- <code class=" language-javascript">'-'</code> frame: 1 "frame" of virtual time passing (see above description of frames).
- <code class=" language-javascript">[0-9]+[ms|s|m]</code> time progression: the time progression syntax lets you progress virtual time by a specific amount. It's a number, followed by a time unit of ms (milliseconds), s (seconds), or m (minutes) without any space between them, e.g. a 10ms b. See Time progression syntax for more details.
- <code class=" language-javascript">'|'</code> complete: The successful completion of an observable. This is the observable producer signaling complete().
- <code class=" language-javascript">'#'</code> error: An error terminating the observable. This is the observable producer signaling error().
- <code class=" language-javascript">[a-z0-9]</code> e.g. 'a' any alphanumeric character: Represents a value being emitted by the producer signaling next(). Also consider that you could map this into an object or an array like this:

## Injecting Dependencies Into Epics

Injecting your dependencies into your Epics can help with testing. Let's say you want to interact with the network. You could use the <code class=" language-javascript">ajax</code> helpers directly from <code class=" language-javascript">rxjs</code>:

<pre class=" language-javascript">
<code class=" language-javascript">
import { ajax } from 'rxjs/ajax';

const fetchUserEpic = (action$, state$) => action$.pipe(
  ofType('FETCH_USER'),
  mergeMap(({ payload }) => ajax.getJSON(`/api/users/${payload}`).pipe(
    map(response => ({
      type: 'FETCH_USER_FULFILLED',
      payload: response
    }))
  )
);
</code>
</pre>

But you are calling the ajax functions from library directly, so it is very difficult to mock it

## Injecting dependencies

To inject dependencies you can use <code class=" language-javascript">createEpicMiddleware</code>'s dependencies configuration option:

<pre class=" language-javascript">
<code class=" language-javascript">
import { createEpicMiddleware, combineEpics } from 'redux-observable';
import { ajax } from 'rxjs/ajax';
import rootEpic from './somewhere';

const epicMiddleware = createEpicMiddleware({
  dependencies: { getJSON: ajax.getJSON }
});

epicMiddleware.run(rootEpic);
</code>
</pre>


So now your epic middleware can use the injected <code class="language-javascript">getJSON</code> instead of importing it itself

<pre class=" language-javascript">
<code class=" language-javascript">
// Notice the third argument is our injected dependencies!
const fetchUserEpic = (action$, state$, { getJSON }) => action$.pipe(
  ofType('FETCH_USER'),
  mergeMap(({ payload }) => getJSON(`/api/users/${payload}`).pipe(
    map(response => ({
      type: 'FETCH_USER_FULFILLED',
      payload: response
    }))
  )
);
</code>
</pre>
And you are able to mock <code class="language-javascript">getJSON</code>
<pre class=" language-javascript">
<code class=" language-javascript">
import { of } from 'rxjs';
import { fetchUserEpic } from './somewhere/fetchUserEpic';

const mockResponse = { name: 'Bilbo Baggins' };
const action$ = of({ type: 'FETCH_USERS_REQUESTED' });
const state$ = null; // not needed for this epic
const dependencies = {
getJSON: url => of(mockResponse)
};

// Adapt this example to your test framework and specific use cases
const result$ = fetchUserEpic(action$, state\$, dependencies).pipe(
toArray() // buffers output until your Epic naturally completes()
);

result\$.subscribe(actions => {
assertDeepEqual(actions, [{
type: 'FETCH_USER_FULFILLED',
payload: mockResponse
}]);
});
</code>
</pre>